Algorithms & Step-by-Step Logic

Designing SMS-Based Crop Price Alerts for Farmers Without Smartphones

🔁 Recap: What We Learned in Module 2

Last module, we mastered decomposition (breaking big problems into small pieces) and abstraction (focusing on essentials while ignoring noise). Using Ethiopia's farm-to-market journey and Nairobi's matatu scheduling chaos, we learned to peel problems like onions—layer by layer—until we found solvable pieces. We discovered that African elders have practiced this for generations: resolving disputes by hearing each voice separately, mapping routes with only key landmarks. The golden rule emerged: "Solve the smallest piece that creates the biggest ripple."

🌱 Welcome, Recipe Makers!

Last module, we broke big problems into pieces. Today, we learn to arrange those pieces into clear, reliable sequences—what we call algorithms. Think of them as recipes: precise enough that anyone (or any computer) can follow them and get the same result.

We’ll design algorithms for farmers who own basic Nokia phones—not smartphones. No apps. No internet. Just good old SMS. Because in Africa, the best solution isn’t always the fanciest—it’s the one that reaches.

🎯 What You’ll Learn Today

✅ Define an algorithm (hint: it’s not just for computers!)
✅ Write step-by-step logic in plain language (pseudocode)
✅ Design for constraints: low bandwidth, low literacy, intermittent power
✅ Test algorithms by walking through them manually (no coding needed)

🔍 Part 1: What Is an Algorithm? (Beyond the Textbook)

Simple definition:

"A foolproof sequence of steps to turn input into output."

African Examples You Already Know:

Algorithm

	

Input

	

Steps

	

Output




Making fufu

	

Cassava + water

	

1. Boil cassava 20 mins
2. Pound in mortar 10 mins
3. Knead until smooth

	

Stretchy fufu ready for soup




Haggling at market

	

Desired price + vendor’s price

	

1. Ask price
2. Shake head, walk away 3 steps
3. Vendor calls you back
4. Offer 60% of original
5. Meet at 75%

	

Fair deal + mutual respect




SMS crop alert

	

Farmer’s location + crop type

	

1. Farmer texts "TOMATO ADDIS"
2. System checks database
3. Replies "TOMATO: 45 ETB/kg TODAY. +5% vs last module"

	

Farmer decides when to harvest

👉 Notice: All three work without computers. Algorithms are human thinking made explicit.

🔍 Part 2: Writing Algorithms for Low-Tech Africa

Challenge: 85% of smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa use basic phones. No touchscreens. No apps. But everyone has SMS.

Let’s design an algorithm for "Farmer Aisha" in rural Tanzania:

Aisha grows tomatoes. She wants to know Addis Ababa market prices before deciding whether to harvest today or wait.

Step 1: Define inputs & outputs

✅ Input: Farmer’s phone number + crop code (e.g., "TOM") + location code ("ADD")
✅ Output: SMS with current price + trend (+/- %) + harvest recommendation

Step 2: Write the step-by-step logic (pseudocode):

START

       RECEIVE SMS from farmer

       EXTRACT: crop_code, location_code

       LOOK UP latest_price IN price_database WHERE crop=crop_code AND market=location_code

       CALCULATE price_change = (today_price - last_module_price) / last_module_price * 100

       IF price_change > 5% THEN recommendation = "HARVEST NOW"

       ELSE IF price_change < -5% THEN recommendation = "WAIT 3 DAYS"

       ELSE recommendation = "MONITOR DAILY"

       SEND SMS: "[CROP]: [price] ETB/kg. [price_change]% vs last module. [recommendation]"

END

Step 3: Test it manually (no computer!)

You = the system. Friend = Farmer Aisha.
Friend texts: "TOM ADD"
You look up fake price table: Tomatoes in Addis = 45 ETB/kg (was 42 last module)
You calculate: (45-42)/42 = +7.1% → "HARVEST NOW"
You reply: "TOMATO: 45 ETB/kg. +7% vs last module. HARVEST NOW"

✅ Works! No coding required—just clear logic.

🌍 Why This Matters in Africa

Constraint

	

Algorithmic Adaptation




Low literacy

	

Use numbers/icons: "1=TOMATO 2=ONION" → Farmer texts "1"




Expensive SMS

	

Compress messages: "T45↑7%" instead of full sentences




No real-time data

	

Cache prices locally on village agent’s phone; sync when connected




Multiple languages

	

Store farmer’s language preference; reply in Swahili/Yoruba/etc.

💡 Golden Rule: "An algorithm that works only on fiber internet solves no African problem."

✍️ Let’s Practice: The "Mobile Money Reversal" Algorithm

Scenario:
A user accidentally sends 500 KES to the wrong number via M-Pesa. They need to reverse it—but only within 2 minutes, and only if the recipient hasn’t withdrawn it.

Your 20-Minute Challenge:

List all possible inputs (e.g., sender phone, amount, time elapsed...)
Write step-by-step logic for the reversal process
Identify 3 places where the algorithm could fail (edge cases)
Design a simple SMS confirmation flow ("Reply 1 to confirm reversal")

💬 Work in trios. Act out the roles: sender, system, recipient.

🧠 Key Takeaways (Pocket Wisdom)

Concept

	

Simple Meaning

	

African Metaphor




Algorithm

	

Foolproof sequence

	

Like your grandmother’s jollof recipe: "2 cups rice. Not 1.9. Not 2.1."




Pseudocode

	

Plain-language blueprint

	

Like explaining dance steps to a friend: "Step left → clap → spin → smile"




Edge Case

	

Unexpected situation

	

Like rain during a wedding: your plan must account for it—or fail gracefully

🌟 Your Assignment: Algorithm for "Community Alert"

Design an SMS-based algorithm for flood warnings in a riverside community (e.g., along River Niger):

Who sends the alert? (village elder? sensor?)
What triggers it? (water level > X cm?)
How do recipients confirm receipt? (critical for accountability)
What happens if SMS fails? (fallback plan)

Write it in plain English—no code. Test it by walking through with a friend.

✨ Remember: The best algorithms feel invisible—they just work when needed.

💬 Professor’s Closing Thought

"In my village in Ghana, the blacksmith doesn’t say 'I use algorithms.' He says: 'First heat the iron until it glows red—not orange, not white. Then hammer 7 times on the anvil. Dip in water. Wait 10 seconds. Repeat.'

That is an algorithm. Tested over generations. Reliable. Life-giving.

You are not learning to code. You are learning to codify wisdom—so it can scale beyond one village, one blacksmith, one lifetime.

That is sacred work."

📌 Summary

Algorithms are foolproof step-by-step recipes—not just for computers, but for life itself. Making fufu, haggling at markets, sending M-Pesa reversals—all follow precise sequences that anyone can replicate. We designed SMS-based crop price alerts for farmers with basic Nokia phones: clear logic where "TOMATO ADDIS" triggers a price reply without apps or internet. Key insight: test algorithms manually before coding—walk through each step with a friend. Design for constraints: compress messages ("T45↑7%"), support local languages, handle edge cases like sudden rain. The best algorithms feel invisible—they just work when needed. Remember: you're not learning to code. You're learning to codify wisdom so it scales beyond one village, one lifetime, one grandmother's memory.

 

📌 Next Class Preview

Module 4: Data Representation & Structures — Storing Community Health Records on Low-Memory Devices in DRC

How do you store 500 patient records on a tablet with 512MB storage—and no internet? Next module, we learn to choose the right container for information. Every byte counts when lives depend on it.

📚 Free Resources (Low-Bandwidth Friendly)

Resource

	

What It Is

	

Why It Helps You

	

Access Link




Twilio API Trial

	

Free SMS sandbox (no credit card)

	

Test your crop alert algorithms with real SMS

	

twilio.com/quest → Works on 2G




Pseudocode Guide (PDF)

	

4-page visual guide to writing plain-language algorithms

	

No jargon—just "if this, then that" examples

	

bit.ly/pseudocode-africa (180KB PDF)




M-Pesa Transaction Simulator

	

Excel sheet mimicking mobile money flows

	

Practice algorithm design with real African transaction patterns

	

Google Sheets: bit.ly/mpesa-sim → "File → Download as Excel"




"Algorithms in African Markets" Podcast

	

15-min audio on haggling as algorithmic thinking

	

Hear how traders use step-by-step logic daily

	

Spotify/Google Podcasts: Search "Tech4Africa S2E3" → Download for offline

💡 Pro Tip: Use Twilio's free tier to send yourself test SMS alerts—see how algorithms feel in real life. 
